Hello, everyone.
In this lesson, we are going to set up a controller.
Don't worry, I do not expect you to know what a controller is at this point.
Towards the end of this lesson, we will start to understand what a controller is.
But at the beginning of this lesson, let's talk about the need that a controller feels.
So in our previous lesson, we created our router not just final, and it has the responsibility of
directing traffic, right.
If a request comes in with this route.
This should happen.
If a request comes in with this route, then this should happen.
And that's great.
But it would be even better if our router didn't have to contain these actual functions and instead
could just call said functions that actually live in a separate file.
Now, at the moment, these functions only contain one real line of code, right?
All this is doing is rendering a view or a template.
So you might be thinking that our current setup is perfectly organized.
However, once we start actually building an application and including all of its logic and validation
and database interactions, there is going to be a lot more code here, a lot more.
And the idea is that the router file should not have to store all of that logic and code.
The router should just be a simple list of your routes, right.
That should be its only real responsibility.
So instead we can split these functions out so that they live in a separate file.
And this is exactly where the idea of a controller comes into play.
So let's do this right now.
I want you to follow along with me and let's create a new folder in the root of our project folder.
And let's name this new subfolder controllers.
Technically, you could name this new folder, anything you want.
But just so you and I are on the same page, let's go with this name of controllers.
OK, now, within this new folder, let's create a new file.
Actually, while we're at it, let's create three new files for the first five.
Let's name a user controller, J.S..
OK, then let's create a second file in the controllers folder and let's name this file post controller,
Dot J.S. And finally, let's create one more file in that new folder and let's name it Falo controller
Dot J.S..
There's nothing special about these names.
I just chose these file names due to the nature of our Web application.
We know that we are going to have user accounts that you can register for or log in and log out of.
We know that those users can create posts, right, with a title and a bit of body text.
And we also know that this app should let the users follow each other.
So big picture, we know that we are going to have to set up code to manage users posts and follows.
So the idea is that each one of these files or controllers will contain relevant functions for that
feature.
So, for example, back in rutabagas, you do not need to type this in.
This is just example code.
But you could imagine if someone sends a post request to create post, well, then our router could
just look inside the post controller for the create function that we have inside that file.
Or if a user wants to log in, they would probably send a post request to a neutral of log in and then
our router could just look inside the user controller for its function named Log In.
So the idea here is that we can just create different functions that live within our controller files
and then our router can easily call or execute those functions.
Not only will this keep our code organized by feature, but it also allows our router to only have that
one responsibility of really just listing out the routes.
Now, at the moment, our controller files do not actually contain any functions.
They're just empty files at this point.
That's why this was just example code.
So right now I will delete those example lines of code and also I'm going to delete this slash about
route, because that was also just an example from the previous lesson.
So now we can actually get to work.
Let's set things up so that our base, you, RL or homepage you R-AL simply calls a function from one
of our controllers here.
Let me show you what I mean.
So right now I want you to follow along with me and jump in to our file named user controller Dot J.S..
Our goal in this file is to export multiple functions that can be accessed from another JavaScript file.
Now, in our previous lesson, we learned about module exports.
Right.
You can set this to equal whatever you want.
And that's what's going to get returned when you require this file from another file.
Now, you do not need to type in the following, because I'm going to show you a cleaner way of setting
this up in about 30 seconds from now.
But if we wanted to export multiple functions, we could set module exports to equal an object.
And then within that object, we could include multiple properties that are just methods.
So we could have one named log in and set that to be a function, and then we could have another one
named Logout and set that to be a function.
And this syntax would work perfectly.
But it is a bit awkward to have to nest a function within a property and within an extra set of curly
brackets like this.
So right now, I want to show you an alternative way that we can set up the exports for our file.
I'm going to delete all of this, and this is what I actually want you to type out with me.
We can say exports dot, and then we can make up a property name, for example, log in and then we
can set that to equal whatever we want in this case, a function.
So function parentheses, curly brackets.
Now, when the node environment sees this code, it's going to know what to do with it.
It's going to make sure that a property named log in is added to what's getting exported from this file.
Big picture.
We are achieving the same thing in terms of exporting something from this file is just that in this
situation, this syntax feels a bit cleaner.
So the idea is that then you could just copy and paste this for all the functions that we need.
So you could paste that and say that we are going to have a log out function and then paste it in again.
We are going to have a register function, right, because we are within the user controller file.
So within the context of a user, they can log in, they can log out, they can register.
And why don't we also create one more function and we can either call it home or.
Dashboard, the name doesn't matter.
Why don't we just go with home so we are on the same page, but the idea is that this is the function
that will get called when someone visits the base.
You are all right.
If they are logged in, they would see their personalized dashboard.
But if they are not logged in, then they should just see the guest homepage template.
Now, for the time being, we have not actually set up the ability to register or log in yet.
So for the time being, within this home function, we would just want to render that home guest HTML
template.
So let's set that up right now.
Within this function, within the parentheses for this function, we would want to include parameters
such as request and response write.
This function is no different from all of the anonymous functions we've been creating for expressed
so far.
If we jump back into rutabagas, it's the exact same thing as this second argument.
We're simply defining a function that should run for that root.
So backing user controller exists within this home function.
Let's just say response dot render and the name of our view or the name of our template was Home Dasch
guest.
OK, let's go ahead and save this file and then we just need to jump in to rutabagas.
And our first step is to import or require in that new file.
So up towards the top, maybe right below this const router line, let's add a new line and let's say
const and let's name the variable user controller and just set it to equal and then just use the require
function.
And we provided a file path.
So we begin with dot forward slash to look within the current directory and then we want to look in
the folder named controllers and then we want to find the file named user controller again.
You do not need to include the DOT.
When you are requiring a file.
OK, now that we've loaded that file in, let's just change the route for our homepage.
So we want to keep router target and the euro that we're looking for.
But we do want to get rid of the second argument, which is the function so you can keep this comma,
but just get rid of function all the way until it's close.
Closing curly brackets.
Right.
So we're back to this when someone sends a request for this euro.
And then for the second argument, we just say user controller, the variable that we just created,
that's going to be the exports of our controller file.
And then we look inside it for our home function or our home method.
Let's go ahead and save this file.
And then if you need to jump into the command line and make sure that your app is running, you can
always just run the command npm run watch and then let's jump over to the browser and test it out.
So if I refresh localhost Colen three thousand, we see that everything is still working perfectly cool.
Now that we have the basic organization of a router and a controller set up, let's look ahead to our
next actual task.
I think it would make sense to focus on the ability of a visitor to register for an account.
So for our first step, let's go into our view or HTML template for this homepage and make sure that
we were aware of what you rl this form attempts to post to.
In other words, where is it going to send its request to.
So back in our text editor, let's look within our views.
Subfolder for the file named home dash guest SJS and scroll down to line number 42.
Online 42, you'll see an opening form tag right now, you can see the action attribute is set to a
placeholder hashtag.
Let's get rid of that and say Slash and you could make up any Eurail, but let's just go a slash register.
Let's go ahead and save that and then jump into our rutabagas file and tell our application what it
should do when it receives a post request to that.
You are so right below this router target line, let's add a new line and say rude or not post.
The first argument should be a neutral of slash register.
And for the second argument, let's just look within our user controller for the function or method
named Register.
Let's save that and then jump in to our user controller file.
Remember, we set up these empty or placeholder functions.
So for the register function within the parentheses for the function, let's be sure to include request
and response and within the body of this function for the time being.
Let's just send back a bit of text.
So response dot send and just say thanks for trying to register.
Be sure to save this file and then let's test it out.
So back in the browser, be sure to refresh.
And then if we try to submit this registration form, if you just click the large green button.
Cool.
We see.
Thanks for trying to register.
We included this fake sample message because actually registering a user is a big topic that needs its
own lesson.
For example, we cannot trust visitors to enter valid information into this form.
On the server side, we need to make sure that they did not leave any of the fields blank.
We need to make sure that their password contains enough characters for security reasons.
We need to make sure they entered a valid email address.
We need to make sure that their username doesn't contain any weird or strange characters.
We need to make sure that both their username and email are unique and not already in use.
So on and so forth.
Now, in the name of staying organized, we do not want to include all of that business logic and data
modeling in our controller.
Instead, we want to keep that code that enforces all of those rules I just described in a separate
file so that our controller does not become bloated.
Now, at this point, I realize you might be getting frustrated with the seemingly endless cycle of
splitting code into separate files.
Don't worry, there's a method to the madness and we only have one more piece of this file splitting
puzzle left to go.
So where is all this file splitting leading us?
Well, for this app we are following the super popular MVC pattern.
MVC is an acronym that stands for Model View Controller.
The idea with the MVC pattern is to keep your code organized into these three distinct components so
that you avoid a tangled up spaghetti mess of code that becomes unmanageable.
And really quick, let's go over the three letters or the three components of the MVC pattern.
So first is the M, which stands for model and the model is where we would include all of our business
logic or all of the rules that we want to enforce on our data.
So, for example, a user's username must be unique.
Their password must be at least twelve characters long, so on and so forth.
Essentially the model is where we model our data.
All right.
Moving on to the V in MVC, the stands for View and the View is self-explanatory in the context of a
Web app.
The View is our HTML template or view file, and that's just the HTML that the users will see in their
Web browser.
We already created a views folder in our project.
So again, I think views is pretty self-explanatory.
OK, and finally, moving on to the last letter and MVC C stands for controller.
The controller is a bit harder to wrap your mind around and it might seem unnecessary at first.
It's the responsibility of the controller to accept input in this case, network requests to our different
routes and then the controller needs to convert that input into appropriate commands for our models
and views.
So we could say the controller is the middleman.
Depending on the incoming request, the controller will call the appropriate model.
Right, with the appropriate business logic and rules that we want to enforce on the data.
And then once that's done, the controller will call the appropriate view and pass it any relevant dynamic
data from the model.
Now, if everything from the last two minutes about MVC is a blur and you're confused, don't worry.
That's completely fine.
No one in recorded human history has ever absorbed or fully understood MVC the first time they heard
about it.
So for now, as long as you're aware that MVC is an acronym to help us keep our code organized and you
remember that the three words, our model, view and controller, even if that's all you absorbed,
then you're right on track.
And you know everything that I expect you to know.
We learn through repetition and throughout the process of building this application.
We're going to practice and review the MVC pattern again and again and again.
And once you see it in action with all three parts working together, it will start to make sense.
Now, keep in mind, though, that this is all just opinion.
Right?
At the end of the day, the MVC pattern or any pattern for organizing a code is all just subjective
preferences.
There's no, quote, right or wrong way to organize your code.
Now, granted, when it comes to MVC, these aren't my super personal and unique opinions as much as
they are just common industry standards that I've picked up over the years.
But still, it's a subjective matter.
So I do want to emphasize that you don't have to organize your project this way.
As we already saw from app number one, you can create an app without any organization.
Big picture MVC is just a very common pattern that you're going to come across in the industry.
And so I want you to be familiar with it.
Now, looking ahead in our next lesson, we're going to learn about the final puzzle piece in the MVC
pattern that we have not covered yet, which is the model setting up our first model should be a lot
of fun.
So let's keep things rolling and I'll see you then.